CHAPTER 1 ECONOMY
Librivox, Part V
One young man of my acquaintance who has inherited some acres
told me that he thought he should live as I did, if he had the means.
I would not have anyone adopt my mode of living on any account,
for, beside that before he has fairly learned it I may have found out another for myself,
I desire that there may be as many different persons in the world as possible,
but I would have each one be very careful to find out and pursue his own way,
and not his father's or his mother's or his neighbour's instead.
The youth may build or plant or sail, only let him not be hindered from doing that which he tells
me he would like to do. It is by a mathematical point only that we are wise, as the sailor or
fugitive slave keeps the pole star in his eye, but that is sufficient guidance for all our life.
We may not arrive at our port within a calculable period, but we would preserve the true course.
Undoubtedly in this case what is true for one is truer still for a thousand, as a large house is
not proportionally more expensive than a small one, since one roof may cover, one cellar underlie,
and one wall separate several apartments, but for my part I preferred the solitary dwelling.
Moreover it will commonly be cheaper to build the whole yourself than to convince another of
the advantage of the common wall, and when you have done this the common partition to be much
cheaper must be a thin one, and that other may prove a bad neighbour, and also not keep his side
in repair. The only cooperation which is commonly possible is exceedingly partial and superficial,
and what little true cooperation there is, is as if it were not being a harmony inaudible to men.
If a man has faith he will cooperate with equal faith everywhere, if he has not faith he will
continue to live like the rest of the world, whatever company he is joined to. To cooperate
in the highest as well as the lowest sense means to get our living together. I heard it proposed
lately that two young men should travel together over the world, the one without money,
earning his means as he went, before the mast and behind the plough, the other carrying a bill of
exchange in his pocket. It was easy to see that they could not long be companions or co-operate,
since one would not operate at all. They would part at the first interesting crisis in their
adventures. Above all, as I have implied, the man who goes alone can start today, but he who
travels with another must wait till that other is ready, and it may be a long time before they get
off. But all this is very selfish I have heard some of my townsmen say. I confess that I have
hitherto indulged very little in philanthropic enterprises. I have made some sacrifices to a
sense of duty, and among others have sacrificed this pleasure also. There are those who have used
all their arts to persuade me to undertake the support of some poor family in the town,
and if I had nothing to do, for the devil finds employment for the idol,
I might try my hand at some such pastime as that. However, when I have thought to indulge myself in
this respect, and lay their heaven under an obligation by maintaining certain poor persons
in all respects as comfortably as I maintain myself, and have even ventured so far as to make them the
offer, they have one and all unhesitatingly preferred to remain poor. While my town's men
and women are devoted in so many ways to the good of their fellows, I trust that one at least may
be spared to other and less humane pursuits. You must have a genius for charity, as well as for
anything else. As for doing good, that is one of the professions which are full. Moreover,
I have tried it fairly, and strange as it may seem, am satisfied that it does not agree with
my constitution. Probably I should not consciously and deliberately forsake my particular calling to
do the good which society demands of me, to save the universe from annihilation.
And I believe that a like but infinitely greater steadfastness elsewhere is all that now preserves
it. But I would not stand between any man and his genius, and to him who does this work,
which I decline, with his whole heart and soul and life, I would say persevere, even if the
world call it doing evil, as it is most likely they will. I am far from supposing that my case
is a peculiar one. No doubt many of my readers would make a similar defense. At doing something,
I will not engage that my neighbors shall pronounce it good. I do not hesitate to say
that I should be a capital fellow to hire, but what that is, it is for my employer to find out.
What good I do, in the common sense of that word, must be aside from my main path,
and for the most part wholly unintended. Men say, practically, begin where you are and such as you
without aiming mainly to become of more worth, and with kindness a forethought go about doing good.
If I were to preach at all in this strain, I should say rather set about being good,
as if the sun should stop when he had kindled his fires up to the splendor of a moon or a star of
sixth magnitude, and go about like Robin Goodfellow peeping in at every cottage window
inspiring lunatics and tainting meats and making darkness visible, instead of steadily increasing
his genial heat and beneficence till he is of such brightness that no mortal can look him in the face.
And then, and in the meanwhile too, going about the world in his own orbit, doing it good,
or rather, as a truer philosopher has discovered, the world going about him getting good.
When Phaeton, wishing to prove his heavenly birth by his beneficence, had the sun's chariot,
but one day, and drove out of the beaten track, he burned several blocks of houses in the lower
streets of heaven, and scorched the surface of the earth, and dried up every spring, and made
the great desert of Sahara, till at length Jupiter hurled him headlong to the earth with
a thunderbolt, and the sun, through grief at his death, did not shine for a year.
There is no odor so bad as that which arises from goodness tainted. It is human, it is divine
carrion. If I knew for a certainty that a man was coming to my house with the conscious design
of doing me good, I should run for my life, as from that dry and parching wind of the African
deserts called the Simum, which fills the mouth and nose and ears and eyes with dust till you are
suffocated, for fear that I should get some of his good done to me, some of its virus mingled
with my blood. No, in this case I would rather suffer evil the natural way. A man is not a good
man to me, because he will feed me if I should be starving, or warm me if I should be freezing,
or pull me out of a ditch if I should ever fall into one. I can find you a Newfoundland dog that
will do as much. Philanthropy is not love for one's fellow man in the broadest sense.
Howard was no doubt an exceedingly kind and worthy man in his way, and has his reward.
But comparatively speaking, what are a hundred Howards to us if their philanthropy do not help
us in our best estate, when we are most worthy to be helped? I never heard of a philanthropic
meeting in which it was sincerely proposed to do any good to me, or the like of me.
The Jesuits were quite balked by those Indians who, being burned at the stake,
suggested new modes of torture to their tormentors. Being superior to physical suffering,
it sometimes chanced that they were superior to any consolation which the missionaries could offer.
And the law to do as you would be done by fell with less persuasiveness on the ears of those who,
for their part, did not care how they were done by, who loved their enemies after a new fashion,
and came very near freely forgiving them all they did.
Be sure that you give the poor the aid they most need, though it be your example which leaves them
far behind. If you give money, spend yourself with it, and do not merely abandon it to them.
We make curious mistakes sometimes. Often the poor man is not so cold and hungry,
as he is dirty and ragged and gross. It is partly his taste, and not merely his misfortune.
If you give him money, he will perhaps buy more rags with it. I always want to pity the clumsy
Irish laborers who cut ice on the pond in such mean and ragged clothes, while I shivered in
my more tidy and somewhat more fashionable garments, till one bitter cold day one who had
slipped into the water came to my house to warm him and I saw him strip off three pairs of pants
and two pairs of stockings ere he got down to the skin. Though they were dirty and ragged enough,
it is true, and that he could afford to refuse the extra garments which I offered him,
he had so many intra ones. This ducking was the very thing he needed. Then I began to pity myself,
and I saw that it would be a greater charity to bestow on me a flannel shirt than a whole
him. There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at the root,
and it may be that he who bestows the largest amount of time and money on the needy is doing
the most by his mode of life to produce that misery which he strives in vain to relieve.
It is the pious slave-breeder devoting the proceeds of every tenth slave to buy a Sunday's
liberty for the rest. Some show their kindness to the poor by employing them in their kitchens.
Would they not be kinder if they employed themselves there? You boast of spending a
tenth so, and done with it. Society recovers only a tenth part of the property then.
Is this owing to the generosity of him in whose possession it is found,
or to the remissness of the officers of justice?
Philanthropy is almost the only virtue which is sufficiently appreciated by mankind.
Nay, it is greatly overrated. It is our selfishness which overrates it.
A robust poor man one sunny day here in Concord praised a fellow townsman to me because,
as he said, he was kind to the poor, meaning himself. The kind uncles and aunts of the race
are more esteemed than its true spiritual fathers and mothers. I once heard a reverend lecturer on
England, a man of learning and intelligence, after enumerating her scientific, literary,
and political worthies, Shakespeare, Bacon, Cromwell, Milton, Newton, and others, speak
next of her Christian heroes, whom, as if his profession required it of him, he elevated to a
place far above all the rest, as the greatest of the great. They were Penn, Howard, and Mrs. Fry.
Everyone must feel the falsehood and cant of this. To last were not England's best men and women,
only, perhaps, her best philanthropists. I would not subtract anything from the praise that is due
to philanthropy, but merely demand justice for all who by their lives and works are a blessing
to mankind. I do not value chiefly a man's uprightness and benevolence, which are, as it
were, his stem and leaves. Those plants of whose greenness withered we make herb tea for the sick
serve but a humble use, and are most employed by quacks. I want the flower and fruit of a man,
that some fragrance be wafted over from him to me, and some ripeness flavor our intercourse.
His goodness must not be a partial and transitory act, but a constant superfluity,
which costs him nothing, and of which he is unconscious. This is a charity that hides a
multitude of sins. The philanthropist too often surrounds mankind with the remembrance of his own
cast-off griefs as an atmosphere and calls it sympathy. We should impart our courage,
and not our despair, our health and ease, and not our disease, and take care that this does
not spread by contagion. From what southern plains comes up the voice of wailing? Under
what latitudes reside the heathen to whom we would send light? Who is that intemperate
and brutal man whom we would redeem? If anything ail a man, so that he does not perform his functions,
if he have a pain in his bowels even, for that is the seat of sympathy, he forthwith
sets about reforming the world. Being a microcosm himself, he discovers, and it is a true discovery,
and he is the man to make it, that the world has been eating green apples. To his eyes, in fact,
the globe itself is a great green apple, which there is a danger awful to think of,
that the children of men will nibble before it is ripe. And straightway his drastic philanthropy
seeks out the Eskimo and the Patagonian, and embraces the populous Indian and Chinese villages,
and thus, by a few years of philanthropic activity, the powers in the meanwhile using
him for their own ends, no doubt, he cures himself of his dyspepsia, the globe acquires a
faint blush on one or both of its cheeks, as if it were beginning to be ripe, and life loses its
crudity, and is once more sweet and wholesome to live. I never dreamed of an enormity greater
than I have committed. I never knew, and never shall know, a worse man than myself.
I believe that what so saddens the reformer is not his sympathy with his fellows in distress,
but though he be the holiest son of God, is his private ale. Let this be righted,
let the spring come to him, the morning rise over his couch, and he will forsake his generous
companions without apology. My excuse for not lecturing against the use of tobacco is that I
never chewed it. That is a penalty which reformed tobacco-chewers have to pay, though there are
things enough I have chewed which I could lecture against. If you should ever be betrayed into any
of these philanthropies, do not let your left hand know what your right hand does, for it is
not worth knowing. Rescue the drowning, and tie your shoestrings, take your time,
and set about some free labor. Our manners have been corrupted by communication with the saints.
Our hymn books resound with a melodious cursing of God and enduring Him forever. One would say
that even the prophets and redeemers had rather consoled the fears than confirmed the hopes of
man. There is nowhere recorded a simple and irrepressible satisfaction with the gift of
any memorable praise of God. All health and success does me good, however far off and withdrawn
it may appear. All disease and failure helps to make me sad and does me evil, however much
sympathy it may have with me or I with it. If, then, we would indeed restore mankind by truly
Indian botanic magnetic or natural means, let us first be as simple and well as nature ourselves,
dispel the clouds which hang over our own brows, and take up a little life into our pores.
Do not stay to be an overseer of the poor, but endeavor to become one of the worthies of the
world. I read in the Gullistan, or Flower Garden of Sheikh Sadi of Shiraz, that,
they asked a wise man, saying, Of the many celebrated trees which the Most High God
has created lofty and umbrageous, they call none azad, or free, excepting the cypress,
which bears no fruit. What mystery is there in this? he replied. Each has its appropriate produce,
and a pointing season, during the continuance of which it is fresh and blooming, and during their
absence dry and withered. To neither of which states is the cypress exposed, being always
flourishing, and of this nature are the azads or religious independence. Fix not thy heart on that
which is transitory, for the Dijla or Tigris will continue to flow through Baghdad, after the race
of caliphs is extinct. If thy hand has plenty, be liberal as the date-tree, but if it affords
nothing to give away, be an azad, or free man, like the cypress.
Complemental Verses The Pretensions of Poverty
Thou dost presume too much, poor needy wretch, to claim a station in the firmament, because thy
humble cottage or thy tub nurses some lazy or pedantic virtue in the cheap sunshine or by shady
springs, with roots and pot-herbs, where thy right hand, tearing those humane passions from the mind,
upon whose stalks fair blooming virtues flourish, degradeth nature and benummeth sense,
and gorgon-like, turns active men to stone. We not require the dull society of your necessitated
temperance or that unnatural stupidity that knows nor joy nor sorrow nor your forced,
falsely exalted passive fortitude above the active. This low abject brood that fix their seats in
mediocrity become your servile minds, but we advance such virtues only as admit excess,
brave bounteous acts, regal magnificence, all seeing prudence, magnanimity, that knows no bound,
and that heroic virtue for which antiquity hath left no name, but patterns only,
such as Hercules, Achilles, Theseus. Back to thy loathed cell, and when thou seest
the new enlightened sphere, study to know but what those worthies were.